[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK, today is our
second and probably last day
of homogeneous dynamics
and projection theory.
Let's remember where
we are, and then we're
going to try to
use the things we
learned about last time to
say something about dynamics.
So we'll have a Lie group
G, which so far is SL2R.
And we have a discrete subgroup,
which so far has been SL2Z.
And we're interested
in G mod gamma.
We'll have a metric m, which is
a right invariant metric on G.
And then it leads to a
metric that I'll also
call m on G mod gamma.
So now G also has a left
action on G mod gamma.
And this left action does
not preserve the metric,
because the metric is
not left invariant.
So this left action
distorts the metric.
And we started to
study that last time,
and it's going to
continue to be crucial
how it distorts the metric.
But it preserves the volume.
Now, inside of this group,
we have the unitary group.
Sorry, the unipotent group.
Let's say UT is 1 1 t.
And our goal is to understand
how the unipotent orbits in G
mod gamma look.
So we're going to study
u dot x in G mod gamma.
So x is in G mod gamma.
And there's an old theorem of
Hedlund from the '30s, which is
the kind of thing about this
orbit that we're interested
in that u dot x is
either periodic or dense.
We won't exactly
prove that, but we'll
prove some things that
are a little bit related.
Now, the unipotent
group is special.
And the one way of
getting our hands
on something special
about it is to see how it
relates to diagonal matrices.
So let's say this a
sub r is that matrix,
that diagonal matrix in SL2R.
And then acute observation is
that a sub r UT a sub r inverse
is u e to the 2rt.
It's just a computation
with matrices.
I've done it a couple
of times, and I
start to-- anyway, doing
it in front of you,
I think, is not very useful.
But if you are interested in
this, if you do it yourself,
it starts to make sense.
So now let's say that u0t of x,
that means the set of ut of x t
is in 0t.
So if capital T is large, this
is a big piece of an orbit.
And that's more or less
what we'd like to study.
What is the shape of a
big piece of the orbit?
And this observation
tells us that u0t of x
is ar u01 ar inverse of x.
And this is helpful, because
this u01 is much less
intimidating than u0t.
So this here is just a
little piece of the orbit.
And so to understand
a big orbit,
we have to understand how this
a sub r acts on a little orbit.
And another simple
observation is that ar
is like a little r to the j.
So if big R is big J times
little r, then we have this.
Oh, in this equation, by the way
e to the big r is t So this ar,
we can think of it as a
little r applied many times.
So therefore, it makes
sense that we could just
try to understand how a little
r acts on unipotent orbits.
So we made a picture of
this at the end of class
last time with models
and props and everything.
And this picture
is the main tool
that we're going to think
about for homogeneous dynamics.
So I'm going to draw
this picture again,
and then we're going
to talk about why
it is the way we drew it.
So over here, a
shape that I'll draw
as being kind of a cylinder.
And this is a
fundamental domain.
So this is either the whole
fundamental domain or maybe
a tube in f.
So f is sitting in the group G,
and it's a fundamental domain
for G mod gamma.
And so this length scale is 1,
and this length scale is also 1.
Or we could also make
it smaller if we'd
like to have a thinner tube.
And now inside of
this tube are a bunch
of pieces of unipotent orbit
that I'll draw like this.
So each of those is a
piece of unipotent orbit.
Here is t equals 0 and
here is t equals 1.
And now I understand what is
going to happen to this picture
when we apply a sub r.
So we're going to apply,
I guess strictly speaking,
we're going to apply
it on the left.
We're going to multiply
by a sub r on the left.
So what's going to happen?
So first of all,
the unipotent orbits
are going to stretch that way.
And then second of
all, so if you just
think about what
happens to the cylinder,
there's going to be a direction
where it stretches, there's
going to be a direction
that compresses,
and there's going to be a
direction that stays the same.
That would be true
at every point.
But what's important is that
the direction that compresses
is kind of not the same
everywhere in this picture.
And so to illustrate
that, I'm going
to draw what happens at a
couple of different heights.
So at t equals 1, I have this.
And there will be some
direction that compresses.
Maybe it's that direction.
And so when we
apply lar inverse,
this disk is going to
be squished vertically.
And when it's
squished vertically,
then we'll have a triangle
that looks sort of like so.
And also at t equals 0,
we have the same disk
with the same triangle in it.
But there's a compression
direction, which is different.
So maybe down here
it's this direction.
So when we apply
la sub r inverse,
then we will get a pancake
and get squished this way.
And that will affect
these points differently.
After squishing, the green
point and the orange point
will be quite close together.
So that's the picture that
we ended with last time.
And what is important
here, key point,
is that the compression
direction is twisting relative
to the unipotent orbits.
Meaning that if
at a given height,
two unipotent orbits are being
compressed towards each other,
then at most other
heights, they won't be.
So this is where we
left off last time.
Are there questions or
comments about this picture?
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: So in the
picture you had last week,
these [INAUDIBLE]
things are all kind of
stretched out and compressed
and then mapped back
onto the fundamental domain.
But if they've been
twisted around,
are they kind of
mapped back onto f
without twisting in some way to
make it all perfectly line up?
Or is there some other
twisting that happens again
as they get back into f?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, yeah.
OK, that's a good question.
So the question is about
how this gets mapped back
into the fundamental domain.
Let's try to draw that also.
So here's our
fundamental domain.
First we apply this
map just in our group,
and we get something
which is tall and flat.
And perhaps, it is
twisted a little bit
between the bottom and the top.
Anyway, then that is going to
get mapped back into our domain.
So pi is the projection
from G to G mod gamma.
And G mod gamma will identify
with our fundamental domain.
So this thing is
going to get back
into the fundamental domain.
What does that look like?
So the fundamental domain
is kind of a unit cube.
But this thing is way
taller than a unit cube.
So imagine cutting
it into pieces
whose height is only around 1.
And this was only ever around 1.
So each of those pieces
now is small enough
to fit in the
fundamental domain.
And let me call it piece
one, piece two, piece three,
and piece four.
Now, those are
going to fold back
into the fundamental domain.
And at least
roughly, I think it's
good to imagine it like this.
So each one of these
guys corresponds
to one of those guys.
But they are not in order.
So it's not like
they go 1, 2, 3, 4.
They're in some order, 1, 2, 3.
So I don't know much
about this order.
I personally don't know
anything about this order.
OK, so now I think
the question was,
how would this picture
look if this thing were
twisted a little bit?
So first of all, when we say
that this thing is twisted
a little bit, it's something
like a change of 90 degrees
or 180 degrees between
the bottom and the top.
And there are many steps
between the bottom and the top.
So that means if you just
look at one of these guys,
you don't notice or barely
notice any twisting.
This thing is basically
a planar slab.
And then these planar slabs are
at slightly different angles.
But this map pi, it
doesn't exactly preserve--
I mean, those angles aren't
exactly well defined,
because this is
not living in R3.
So it's actually not
clear exactly what
we mean when we say that
this slab and this slab,
are they parallel or are they
twisted compared to each other?
Anyway, when they
get mapped back in,
I think that imagining
this is reasonable.
Now, that raises a
bit of a question,
coming back to this
picture that we were
trying to digest last time.
What exactly do we mean when
we say that the compression
angle is twisting?
Because the compression angle
here lives at one height.
It lives over here, and
the compression angle there
lives over there.
And how do we compare
an angle over here
with an angle over here
given that this is not R3,
this is living in
a curved thing?
So I actually rethought
how to state it,
and I added some
words that I don't
think I mentioned last time.
I think when we talk
about this twisting,
we need to include
these words relative
to the unipotent orbits.
So let me try to make a more
precise statement about what
this twisting means,
and then we'll
see how we can do some
computations in the Lie group
with matrices and
see that it happens.
All right.
OK.
So precise statement
about what is twisting.
What is twisting.
So suppose I have a
piece of unipotent orbit
in my fundamental domain.
It starts at G0.
That's over there,
some group element,
and our fundamental domain.
And then over here
I have UT of G0.
And t goes, say, from 0 to 1.
Now, at each point
here, there's going
to be a vector that
compresses when I perform ar.
So let's say v compression of t.
This is a vector, and
this is the direction
that compresses when we
apply a left ar inverse.
So it's a vector.
It lives in the tangent space
of our group at the given point.
And it's the smallest
singular vector
for the derivative of this map.
So that's what we mean by
the compression direction.
Now, what does it mean relative
to the unipotent orbits?
So suppose that over here I
have another unipotent orbit.
And this is like a
nearby unipotent orbit.
So this might be G0
plus epsilon times v0.
Epsilon times v0
is a little vector
that goes between these
starting points of these two
nearby unipotent orbits.
And up here, or maybe here,
is UT of G0 plus epsilon v0.
And here there's a vector
that goes between them,
I guess, epsilon
times v orbit of t.
So v orbit of t is going in the
direction from the red orbit
to the orange orbit.
So the thing that is
twisting is v compression
of t relative to v
orbit of t is twisting.
The angle between those
two vectors is changing.
That's the precise statement
of what is twisting.
And we can check
what it's happening
by computing these two vectors.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
LAWRENCE GUTH: So
the question has
to do with keeping track of
things, given that they live
in different tangent spaces.
So the compression
direction is a vector
in the tangent space at the
given point along the orbit.
Is that OK so far?
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
But then the
comment is if I have
a family of vectors
in one vector space,
then I can say that
they're twisted.
But here I have a
family of vectors
in a family of vector spaces.
And so it's not so clear what
it means that they're twisting.
One way to do it is to
pick a reference vector
to compare them with.
And so that's the job of this
v orbit vector, which goes
from the red vector to this--
from the red orbit
to this orange orbit.
And that's like a
reference vector.
And then we'll see that--
so at each t, there's an orbit
vector and a compression vector,
and the angle between
them is changing.
So there was a question last
class that basically was like,
how are we sure that this is
happening in this picture?
And the one way to be sure is
to compute these two vectors
and see that they're
not the same.
So let's compute them.
Actually, one of them we
can compute over here.
So UT is a matrix.
So we can just
multiply this through.
This is UT G0 plus
epsilon UT of v0.
And if we compare sides,
we see that v orbit of t
is u sub t of v.
Now, let's figure out
what v compression of t is.
So say we have some
G0 and we're going
to apply the left
action of ar inverse.
And that will move
us to a sub r of G0.
And we want to understand
how this map is
distorting the geometry of G0.
The geometry near G0.
And in particular,
figure out which
direction is being compressed.
So I think the best
way I could figure out
to understand this is to put
it in a picture connecting
this thing that I don't
understand yet to some maps that
are easier to understand.
So here's the identity.
And from here to here, I could
apply a right multiplication
by G0.
And right multiplication is
much easier to understand,
because that's an isometry.
And the identity also is kind
of nicer than other matrices.
And then I'm going to
go back to the identity.
So this is right
multiplication by ar g0
all inverse, which
is also an isometry.
So if you put this
all together, I'm
going to have a map from the
tangent space of the identity
to itself.
And that map is
an isometry times
the map I want to
understand times
an isometry so that all
of the metric distortion
is going to come from here.
Now, this map is not
so hard to understand.
So if I apply--
what am I doing?
Sorry.
I start with some matrix h.
Right multiply by G0.
Then I left multiply by ar.
Then I right multiply
by the inverse of ar G0.
What do I get?
Well, I have h.
I multiply on the right by G0.
Now I multiply on
the left by ar.
I multiply on the right by this.
When I invert this,
I switch those.
I get a G0 inverse
and they cancel.
So this operation is none
other than conjugating by ar.
So this is the
conjugation by arh.
So conjugation by ar is a map
from our new group to itself,
takes the identity
to the identity.
And therefore, this map,
or really its derivative,
takes the tangent space
of the identity to itself.
All right.
And now you can write this down.
This ar is an explicit matrix.
A Tangent vector here
is a matrix ABCD.
So this is just
ABCD goes to DCAR
of this is er minus
r, ABCD e or minus r.
So this is a thing
you can write down.
It's not that scary.
And we worked out last
time what it does.
So recall from last time
that we have-- first of all,
we have an orthonormal
basis of Te of G,
which are-- there's a
basis vector n, 0, 1, 0, 0.
Last time I called
this u, but there
were so many u's
on the blackboard
that I was worried it
was not a great idea,
so I'm going to call it n. n for
nilpotent, which is also true.
There's n tilde,
which is 0, 1, 0, 0.
And there's a diagonal
guy, which looks like this.
OK.
So What we figured out is
that the conjugation makes
n way bigger, it makes
n tilde way smaller,
and it leaves the
diagonal fixed.
OK.
So, if I start at the identity
and I go all the way around,
I'm doing this
conjugation, and n tilde
is the vector that's
going to get compressed.
But now, if I want to
know what vector over here
is going to get compressed,
Well, I start with n tilde,
I map it over here.
It hasn't gotten any shorter
yet because this is an isometry.
That's the vector that's going
to be compressed in this step.
OK.
So, it's the right
action by g0 of n tilde.
This is the singular vector of
dLar inverse with singular value
e to the minus 2r.
OK, so that's basically
the answer to our question.
So the compression
vector at T, that's
r at-- so now I'm not
necessarily at the point g0,
but I'm at the point ut g0, so
it's right by ut g0 of n tilde.
So that's n tilde ut g.
OK.
So now, if you compare how these
two things are changing with T,
you see, it is not the same
because our group is not
commutative.
Because when you're
changing the orbit of T,
you're multiplying
by ut on the left.
But when you're changing
the compression direction,
you're multiplying by ut
over here in the middle.
And it's a
non-commutative group,
so those two operations are
not the same as each other.
OK.
So I don't necessarily
think it will
be helpful to do
more computations,
but I did some at
home to be sure,
if you imagined that at time 0,
these two directions coincided,
and then you see what
happens as T changes,
you'll see that they
stop to coincide.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: So it can be the inner
product of the vectors, does
it make sense as an operation to
compare the angles in the space?
LAWRENCE GUTH:
Yeah, that's right.
So these are vectors in
a Riemannian manifold,
and so they have a
well-defined angle,
and we can compute it by
taking inner products.
And then-- correct.
So I guess we could say that the
cosine of the angle between v
of t and w of t would be v dot
w over norm of v norm of w.
I used to teach
this a lot in 1802.
I think that's right.
So we have formulas for v and
w, so we can compute this.
And it'll be a little
messy, but we'll
see that it is not
constant in T. OK.
Other questions or comments?
OK.
So the first big goal-- that was
the first chunk of the class.
The first big goal
of the class was
to check that this
picture happens.
And then the second
part of the class, we
will discuss how
to use this picture
to figure out stuff about
along unipotent orbit.
OK.
So let's switch gears.
So let's call this tracking
the spread of an order.
All right.
So remember that we had
this, U0,T of x is aR U0,
1 aR inverse x.
Let's call this guy x tilde.
OK.
Now this-- there was a
discussion last time,
what happens if this
orbit here is periodic?
If this orbit here is periodic,
the special thing that happens
is that this point, x tilde,
will be deep in the cusp.
And the deep in the
cusp is a special case
because we were
imagining that this
was a regular nice
orbit of length 1,
but if it's deep in the
cusp, it's different.
So, let's assume that x tilde
is not deep in the cusp.
And that's equivalent
to saying that Ux is not
close to periodic.
OK.
And let's break up R as
capital J times little r.
And so then I'm going to say
that Uj is a little r to the j
of U0,1 of x tilde.
OK.
And I want to track how
this thing is spreading out
through my homogeneous
space, GY gamma.
And we're going to track it by
noticing how many delta balls
it takes to cover it.
So recall that X delta is
the minimum number of delta
balls needed to cover X.
And so our goal is
going to be to estimate.
Uj delta in terms
of j, delta, and r.
Oh.
And for context,
for reference, we
have a three-dimensional space.
So for the whole
space, the number
of delta balls that
we need to cover it
is delta to the minus 3.
OK.
Cool.
All right, so next
of all, our Uj
is like a bunch of
these unipotent orbits.
Looks like that.
And so you might
notice that it only
really matters what the top
cross-section looks like.
All the other
cross-sections are similar.
So let's take that
top part down.
Inside of there, we see this.
So let's call that Xj.
That's the top
cross-section of Uj.
And then it's not hard
to check that Uj delta is
like delta inverse
times Xj delta.
I have to cut it into
slabs of thickness delta.
For each thickness, the
number of delta balls
that we need to cover
that slab is Xj delta,
and this is the number of slats.
OK.
So basically, we want to track
how Xj delta depends on delta.
So, fully spread.
Or maybe I'll say very spread.
That means that Uj delta is
like delta to the minus 3,
and that would be like saying Xj
delta, so delta to the minus 2
at Xj.
Really fills a lot of the disc.
So now, how does this picture
help us to study Xj delta?
So using the key picture.
All right.
So let me label these maps pi
1 and pi minus 0, and somewhere
in the middle we
would have pi t.
Pi t is what our map aR is
doing to the slice at height t.
OK.
Using the key
picture, have a lemma.
So if e to the
minus 2r is delta,
then Xj plus 1 delta is around a
sum over t of pi t of xj delta.
And which t's do we sum over?
The t's are in delta Z,
and t goes from 0 to 1.
This is all-- we can also
write this as delta inverse
times the average
t between 0 and 1
of pi t height of Xj delta.
So, proof sketch.
OK.
So here is our
fundamental domain.
Cut it into slices
of thickness delta.
So here is a slice at height
t with thickness delta.
OK.
Now, when we apply Lar, we
stretch it up vertically.
And we compress it in
some other direction,
we get something like this.
And then we divide this into
pieces at different heights.
And let me color this
particular slab in red.
So that red one is
one of them over here.
So these are each of height 1.
OK.
Right.
So, in this new picture, there
will be-- so in the old picture,
there were some unipotent orbits
that went through our slab.
So, X describes where
the unipotent orbits
hit the top of our slab.
And now, we apply this
map, and now there
will be some points over
here in the top of this slab.
And who will they be?
Those points over there
would be pi t of X.
OK.
Now we want to cover
things with delta balls.
So this distance here is e to
the minus 2r, so that's delta.
So we want to know how
many delta balls does
it take to cover that?
So, that number there is delta
covering number of pi t of Xj.
So over here, we
started with xj.
Now, what happens
when we apply pi?
Each of these slabs
gets folded back in.
And the red one went somewhere.
I don't really know where,
but maybe it went over here.
And here in the
top of it is pi t
of Xj and its
delta-covering number.
So the number of delta
balls in this strip, that
would be pi t of Xj.
OK.
And now, this thing--
these dots up here
are our Xj plus 1.
So the set of dots
on the top face.
And so how many delta balls
do we need to cover them?
Well, for these ones, we needed
pi t Xj delta-covering number,
and these other guys, those
corresponded to different slabs
here, so there are
different terms in this set.
OK.
So now, we can try to
use projection theory
to study this thing,
and it will tell us
how the covering
number Xj plus 1 delta
evolves as we increase
J. Any questions-- yeah.
AUDIENCE: Why do-- like,
we have delta balls start
to overlap when
j is large enough
and the compression
is more than delta
because delta is the size
of one round of compression.
If you do multiple,
why do they overlap?
LAWRENCE GUTH: So I
think the question is,
suppose at the beginning
that there happened
to be two guys here in X
whose distance was less
than delta, which might happen.
And then, what would
happen to them?
Well--
AUDIENCE: Not that
they're less than delta.
If slightly more than delta, but
less than e to the minus 2r or e
to the 2r delta, so that in f,
they're in the same delta ball.
Then applying the
transformation, the [INAUDIBLE]
or transformation method,
then they become [INAUDIBLE]
delta ball.
But before they're
not in-- before,
there were two separate delta
balls; after the transformation,
there's one delta ball.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right, right.
OK, so it could happen
that we have two guys--
like maybe these two guys
are pretty far apart,
but after we perform pi t,
they got squished together
and they're now in the
same delta ball over here.
Yeah, that could happen.
And the main thing we have to
study is how often that happens.
But this lemma is still true.
This might be a lot
smaller than Xj delta
because many points that
were far apart in Xj
may have gotten squished
together in pi t of Xj.
But this is just the
number of delta balls
that it takes to
cover the image there.
Does that answer your question?
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
Also, in the third image, why
is each delta ball containing
only the size of
one of those strips?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Ah, OK.
So we tuned delta and
r to play together.
So that we picked r so that
the thickness of this strip
is delta.
AUDIENCE: I thought if the
transformation is applied
multiple times, then you get
multiple e to the minus 2rj
scale, right?
LAWRENCE GUTH: That's not
wrong, but when we apply it
multiple times, we're
not changing little r,
we're just applying a sub r--
a sub little r multiple times.
So this picture is describing
what happens in one time,
and then you could use
this in many rounds.
So you could use this
lemma over and over again.
Which is what we'll do.
OK.
Let me change my
notation a little bit.
So I was using the letter pi
for this maybe a little bit
prematurely.
What's clear so far
is that this is a map,
so I'm going to call
it f1, ft, and f0.
And so then I'll change this.
OK.
So now, the next remark
is that these maps look
a lot like linear projections.
So remark, ft is
kind of approximately
an orthogonal projection pi t.
So let me make a picture.
So ft does something like this,
and this thickness is delta.
This is 1.
And then pi t would just be an
actual orthogonal projection.
OK.
So ft is not perfectly
linear, but it is smooth.
OK.
So now, here is a proposition--
or exercise about projections.
It says that if X is in
the unit ball in a plane,
then you take the average over
all directions, theta and S1,
of pi theta of X delta that
is at least as big as X delta
to the 1/2.
Here's an example that shows
where the X delta to the 1/2
comes from.
So here's the unit ball.
And then inside of it,
I take a smaller ball
and I call that X. So, X is the
ball of some small radius rho
inside of the ball of radius 1.
OK.
Then when I perform an
orthogonal projection--
there is pi theta of
X, in any direction
I'll get a line of length rho.
So I see that X delta
is like rho over delta
squared, and pi theta of
X delta-covering number
is like rho over delta, so this
is the square root of that OK.
And this is the
best thing to do.
You could devise
an example where
in one particular direction,
the compression is much smaller
than the square root.
Here's an example like that.
B1.
Here's X. Here's theta.
OK.
In this example, pi theta
of X delta is much smaller--
I'll call this theta 0--
much smaller than X delta
to the 1/2 for one theta 0.
But at least in this picture,
most of the projections
are way bigger.
OK.
So it's not super difficult
to check this proposition,
and I'm going to
make it an exercise.
I think we're out
of problem sets,
but if we weren't, this is a
nice one to review the class.
OK.
Another comment is even though
these ft's are not exactly
linear maps, so that we cannot
just literally apply this
proposition, they are close
enough that by using the proof
of this, you can
get it for ft, too.
So remark, the proof
applies to ft. OK.
So if we put together this
lemma and this proposition,
we'll get an estimate about the
delta-covering number of Xj.
OK.
So corollary, if we
put these together,
Xj plus 1 delta-covering number
is at least around delta inverse
times Xj delta to the 1/2.
Proof.
So Xj plus 1 delta is
at least, by our lemma,
delta inverse times the
average over t of Xj--
of ft of Xj delta.
And then by our proposition,
that's at least delta inverse
times Xj delta to the
1/2, and that's the proof.
OK.
So then let's just
track what this means.
So X0 delta would be 1.
Think about what X0 delta
means, it's one unipotent orbit.
So therefore, X1 delta would be
at least around delta inverse,
X2 delta would be at least
around delta to the minus 3/2,
X3 delta be at least around
delta to the minus 1 and 3/4,
and so on, and you'd get pretty
close to delta to the minus 2.
OK.
And delta to the minus 2 would
be like a definite fraction
of the whole space.
All right.
So this proves that a
unipotent orbit that's
not close to periodic, it
proves that it fills up
a lot of the homogeneous space.
And it's not Hedlund's theorem.
Hold on a second.
So we didn't prove yet
that the orbit is dense.
The orbit could be missing
an entire ball that's
like half the size of the space,
and this could still be true.
But we did prove that the
orbit goes a lot of places.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: In this proof, does--
since applying it each time
loses some of implicit constant,
how do we know that it's
not becoming dense and just,
like, an infinitesimally small
region of this whole space?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right.
So I think the question is
like, we didn't actually
get to a constant times
delta to the minus 2,
and if I tried to do this
infinitely many times,
I would be losing a
constant each time.
Yeah, that's right.
So imagine doing this 10
times and we get delta
to the minus 1.99.
And that's what the
method proves so far.
So stronger things are
true, but this method
doesn't prove them yet.
So remark, this doesn't show
that the orbit is actually
dense, and so maybe question,
could the orbit do this?
So here's our homogeneous
space, there's a cusp,
but it's not that important.
And then the orbit
goes around a good bit,
but it only ever goes
around over here,
and it never goes over there.
So this proof doesn't
say anything about that.
OK.
So, as far as I know, to
finish Hedlund's theorem
requires another step that
is based on different ideas
from these ideas.
So there's more to homogeneous
dynamics than this story,
but we did still learn
something interesting.
Cool.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Do how
close as possible
to get to the full theorem
by trying to optimize all
the constants in this proof?
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
So there are two things that
we might like to improve here.
So the question is, how close
can we get to the full theorem
by optimizing the argument
that we've been talking about?
So one thing that
you might like is
you might like to actually
get to delta to the minus 2.
That still wouldn't necessarily
rule out this possibility,
but it would be interesting.
And if you look at this
proposition, one thing
that you notice, that
this proposition is
sharp in this very clumped case.
And if you remember back to
the early months of our class,
if x was not so
compressed, then there
would be even better estimates.
So if you knew as an input
that x is not too clustered,
then you could get all the
way to delta to the minus 2
in one step or two
steps or something.
And so you might
try to track that.
You might try to track not
just the delta-covering number,
but also the rho-covering number
for different delta and rho,
and then you could take
advantage of this clustering.
And I am not positive, but I
think it is a reasonable 18-156
project to try to use that
to get all the way to delta
to the minus 2.
Oh.
Even if you got a constant
times delta to the minus 2,
it would still not
be obvious to me
that you filled
the entire manifold
and that you're
not missing a ball.
And I thought about it
yesterday and today,
and I don't have a good
understanding yet of what you
need to get everywhere.
So I would be interested to
learn if people have thoughts
about it or know about it.
OK.
Cool.
So I think that
there are actually
are a bunch of ways to
prove Hedlund's theorem,
and this is not one that I
have seen in the literature.
And all of these problems
become more difficult and maybe
more interesting when you
go to higher dimensions.
So the projection theory also
becomes more difficult and more
interesting in
higher dimensions,
and I wanted, in the
last part of the class,
to just show you what happens.
And in particular, we
will see a new question
about projection theory
that we haven't mentioned
so far in this class,
but which I think
is a really cool question.
OK.
So let me put it this way.
What about SLn R?
OK.
So, I'm going to take a
somewhat specific example,
although I think most
of what we'll say then
would work for any n.
So for example, we
could have SL3 R
for our G, gamma
could be SL3 z, and U
could be the unipotent group of
matrices that look like this.
So from what I
understand, there are
several different one-parameter
unipotent subgroups
of SL3 R. They're slightly
different from each other.
And this one is
particularly well-studied
in the homogeneous
dynamics community
because it's the
one that comes up
in the Oppenheim conjecture
about quadratic forms.
But anyway, so we have this
one-parameter subgroup.
And so let's call this u sub t.
OK.
So our basic setup
with conjugating
by a diagonal
matrix, that works.
And the relevant diagonal
matrix is this matrix.
OK.
And then you can check that
a sub r u sub t a sub r
inverse is u sub e to the r t.
Turns out to be e to the
r t, not e to the 2r t,
but that's not too big a deal.
OK.
So now, we have a bunch of
unipotent orbits like before.
It was a bunch of
unipotent orbits.
But the dimension of our
group is 8 instead of 3.
And so we have the
direction along the orbits,
t equals 0 up to t equals 1,
that's still one-dimensional.
So this thing here is a
seven-dimensional ball
instead of a disc.
OK.
So now, we apply--
we study the action
of Lar inverse.
And we'll have a
picture like this.
f1.
f0.
And, OK, something
here will happen,
and something different
here will happen.
OK.
So you can study the
singular values--
the singular values--
of Lar inverse.
And those are equal to the
singular values of conjugation
by ar.
So conjugation by ar is a very
nice operation on matrices,
you can write it down
and see what happens.
And you can compute
these singular values.
And they are as follows.
e to the minus 2r, e to the
minus r, e to the minus r, 1, 1,
e to the r, e to
the r, e to the 2.
I won't do it on the board,
but I promise it's not hard.
OK.
Now one of these singular values
corresponds to the U-direction.
So, little n is
the vector that's
the tangent vector to the
group u at the identity.
And so little n is--
it's not super important
what the formula is,
but if you differentiate that,
you'll see that the tangent
vector is that.
And that's one of these guys.
So as before, the direction
of the orbits is expanding.
And then on the B 7, we have
the other seven directions.
So this thing over here is
an ellipsoid with axes e
to the minus 2r, e to the minus
r, e to the minus r, 1, 1,
e to the r, e to the 2.
OK.
So, as we go from here
to here, these maps
are not exactly linear, but
they're close to linear,
they're close to linear maps,
and they stretch some directions
and they compress other
directions by these amounts.
OK.
So, what is different
from before?
OK.
One difference is that
this thing is not exactly
a projection.
But that's not the most
important difference.
So differences from last time.
Right.
So if we had an
approximate projection that
went from the 7 ball to some
vector space V of dimension
three, say-- so four
dimensions are getting squished
and three dimensions
are staying as they are,
that would be approximately a
linear map with singular values
e to the minus r, e to the
minus r, e to the minus r,
e to the minus r, 1, 1, 1.
If I had a linear map like
that, these guys are almost 0.
So these are the four directions
that are being squished,
these are the three directions
that are staying the same.
The list of singular values
here is not quite like that.
Some of them are bigger than
1, we didn't have that before.
And the ones that are--
some of them are equal to 1.
The ones that are smaller than
1 have two different scales.
So that's a little
bit more complicated,
but I don't want to focus on it.
So, our singular values are
a little more complicated.
OK.
Let's ignore that.
Suppose each of
these linear maps
actually had those
singular values,
so it was more like what we were
used to in projection theory.
There would be a
different-- there
would be another difference from
before, which is more important.
So number 1.
Number 2, we still have
only a one parameter family
of linear maps.
OK.
So before, when we talked about
projections from B 7 to V--
to the three-dimensional vector
space, we talked about all
of them.
If you look at all of
the projections from B 7
to the three-dimensional
vector spaces,
then something nice
happens most of the time.
But we don't have all of them.
We just have a very
thin subfamily.
So this is not all
of the projections.
Cool.
OK.
So there's also a
cosmetic complication
that 7 is a lot of dimensions
and there are a lot of numbers,
but that's not that
important, it's just a pain.
But these are this
to some extent,
and this is a really fundamental
conceptual difference.
So I wanted to show you not
this problem, but the simplest
problem of this type.
Which is called the
restricted projection problem.
OK.
All right.
So this question, which I
think is a cool question,
was raised by Fassler, Katrin
Fassler, and Tuomas Orponen
in 2013.
And the question is like this.
So here's the 2 sphere.
So we're going to be doing
projection theory in three
dimensions, in R 3, so the
different directions are
parametrized by the 2 sphere.
But we're not going to
project in all of them,
we're just going to pick
some curve gamma and project
in the directions of gamma.
So gamma contained
in S2 is a curve.
The question is like this.
If X is contained
in the unit 3 ball,
and let's say x is
a delta, s, C set--
we'll put-- to make
it interesting,
we put some kind of
non-concentration condition,
and this is the one that they
had in their paper, basically.
OK.
Then estimate the average
over all the directions
in gamma of the pi theta
of X delta-covering number.
OK, so pi-- so theta is a
direction, an element of S 2,
and pi theta is the
orthogonal projection
from R 3 to theta perp.
So from three dimensions
to two dimensions.
So estimate the average of that.
So we still have that--
I erased the wrong thing.
OK.
On this very board, not
two minutes ago, there
was a proposition that said
if you had a set in R 2,
and you projected it in
all the different angles,
then on average, the
delta-covering number
of the projection was at
least something or another.
So this is like
an analog of that
in three dimensions for a set
with the spacing condition,
but with the key
difference that we're not
averaging over
all of them, we're
only averaging over the ones
in a particular curve gamma.
OK.
Now, an interesting
thing about this question
is that it matters what
the curve gamma is.
And in particular,
there's a big difference
between an equator, which
is like a straight line
on the sphere, and a
non-degenerate, or curved gamma.
So the answer depends
on whether gamma--
gamma is the equator--
is one extreme or
gamma non-degenerate
is another extreme.
Instead of writing the
definition of non-degenerate,
let me just give you one example
of a non-degenerate curve.
So, an example of a
non-degenerate curve is gamma is
equal to the set of theta in S
2 so that the third component
of theta is 1/2.
OK.
So it looks like the boundary
of the spherical cap.
OK.
So let me show you how these
are different from each other.
OK.
So example.
Say gamma is the
equator and S is 2.
So we have a, quote unquote,
"two-dimensional set,"
delta 2 set.
OK.
So our set X is going to
be a delta-by-1-by-1 slab.
So it looks-- and so imagine
that the two big directions are
in the plane of the blackboard,
and the slab is sticking out
of the blackboard by
a little bit delta.
OK.
Now, there's an
equator of directions
that we're going to
project in, and think
of that as the equator that's
like the sphere with center
at the blackboard, intersected
the sphere with the blackboard,
you would get a circle.
So here's gamma.
So now, if theta is in gamma,
then the projection of X
is a delta-by-1 rectangle.
So there's a circle
of directions
where if you project
this slab, you just
get a delta-by-1 rectangle.
OK.
So then we see that the
average pi theta of x delta
is like delta inverse.
OK.
Now there's no obvious
version of this example
where gamma is that curve
that's up near the top.
And the difference is--
so if you're projecting
in a certain direction,
then the fibers are like
lines in that direction.
And so what's special here
is that all of these lines
are coplanar, and so you can
have a planar object that
has a lot that--
where these lines
intersected a lot.
And instead, when we
have those directions,
then all of our
lines make an angle
of 45 degrees with
the horizontal.
They're like light cones.
And they just don't fit
together in the same nice way
that coplanar
lines fit together.
So it makes a difference.
And Fassler and
Orponen, they proved
that it makes a difference.
So they proved some bounds for
that thing that are strictly
bigger than this thing.
But it took a while to figure
out what is the sharpest bound.
And that was figured
out some time later
in a paper of six authors,
Shengwen Gan Shaoming Guo me,
Terence Harris, Dominique
Maldague, and Hong Wang,
many of whom were here working
on it at various times.
OK.
And we proved--
I'll just do a special case.
So if XCB 3 is a delta, 2, C
set and gamma is non-degenerate,
like this example above,
then the average theta
in gamma of pi theta of
X delta-covering number
is bigger than C epsilon delta
to the negative 2 plus epsilon.
OK.
And the best thing you
could hope for here
is delta to the
minus 2 because x
itself probably has
delta-covering number
delta to the minus 2.
So up to small issues that--
this is the Sharpe theorem.
OK.
This proof is based on some
version of the Fourier analysis
method, but it's a
more difficult version
that involves decoupling.
OK.
Cool.
So this connection between
projection theory and--
between homogeneous dynamics
and projection theory
was discovered by Elon
Lindenstrauss and Amir
Mohammadi, who were working on
quantitative estimates for how
unipotent orbits become
dense in this setup.
And they realized
this connection
with projection theory, and
they found the literature,
they found the paper
by Fassler and Orponen
and all the follow-up papers.
And they used those tools to
prove quantitative estimates
about how these
unipotent orbits mix.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: There's a question
of projection theory
where each unipotent element
induces a different projection.
Is that set of projections dense
in the whole-space projections,
or is it some non-dense subset?
LAWRENCE GUTH: No, it's
some non-dense subset.
Yeah, so here, t is
going from 0 to 1.
For each t, we have more
or less a projection.
And so we have a smooth curve
of length 1 in the space of--
or not exactly projections,
but the space of linear maps.
And so it is not, in any
sense, becoming dense
in the space of linear maps.
It's really just a
few special ones.
And this is a reasonable
model to picture in your mind.
That sphere is like
all of the projections
or all of the linear maps,
and that orange circle
is the ones that come up
in homogeneous dynamics.
Yeah.
OK.
So in the last two minutes,
I will write down a theorem
that they proved.
At least approximately.
OK, so this is Lindenstrauss,
Mohammadi, Wang, and Yang.
So setup is on that board.
So if G is SL 3, R, gamma
is SL 3, Z, U as above.
OK.
We take X and we
suppose U dot X is not
close to a proper
homogeneous subspace.
So this is some analog of
being not close to periodic.
OK.
Then the conclusion
is that U 0, T of X
is delta dense in the
homogeneous space,
but so the homogeneous
space has infinite diameter,
so this can't quite be true.
But in the-- if you
cut off the cusp--
so you cut off the cusp, so you
have a compact piece of this.
And delta is T to the minus c.
c greater than 0 is
a universal constant.
OK.
And a key step in
the proof is to first
show an estimate of the kind
that we were talking about,
that the delta-covering number
of this orbit is pretty big.
So the biggest it could possibly
be would be delta to the minus
the dimension of
the group, that's
the delta-covering number
of the whole space.
And it's quite close to that.
That's a key step.
It's an analogous to the
proof that we sketched
for the simpler SL 2, R case.
And there is an
additional argument,
but it seems like the most novel
and important part of this paper
was using projection theory,
using those kind of theorems,
plus some other smart stuff
to show that the orbit covers
a lot of ground.
OK.
OK, so homogeneous
dynamics is a big subject,
and there are different
techniques, but in this course,
I wanted to show that there's
a connection to projection
theory, which is one
set of techniques,
and which helps to say
some interesting things.